## The NESCent Hackathon Model

The NESCent Model for hackathons distinguishes itself in certain
salient characteristics from the many other models being
practiced. These characteristics are motivated by two foundational
objectives: one, to allow tackling the often difficult problems of
making existing tools and resources work together more seamlessly; and
two, to foster sustained, cohesive communities of practice.

The distinguishing characteristics designed to accomplish these
objectives can be reduced to a combination of the following three.

1. **A participant group that balances diversity with homogeneity, and
   that is about 20-30 people in size.** The idea is a group small and
   homogeneous enough in size and composition that every participant
   will still interact with everyone else in at least a meaningful
   social capacity, yet large enough to allow for diversity in a
   variety of aspects, including perspectives, skills, career stage,
   field of study, and demographics.

2. **A well-defined scope that everyone buys into by virtue of
   participating.** Such a definition gives functional as well as
   technological targets. It is also balanced between open enough to
   allow for emergent outcomes, and specific enough to define the
   event by requiring, and thus signifying buy-in from prospective
   participants to shared goals and desired outcomes.

3. **A duration of 4.5-5 days.** This has shown to be still short enough
   to not preclude people from participating who are otherwise well
   suited for an event. It is also long enough to allow participants
   to attempt solutions to data and software interoperability issues,
   which are often challenging yet become tractable with the right set
   of collaborators in the room. And it is long enough to allow ample
   room for participant bonding over common obstacles and shared
   goals, which is key to fostering and sustaining community
   growth and cohesion.

We have used this model exclusively for hackathons in academia, for
bringing together academic research projects, and to foster
communities of practice that consist largely of scientists and
research staff. The model is potentially well applicable to non-profit
and government settings as well, but in the industry realm in
particular the duration will prevent most people from participating.

The following additional characteristics have also emerged as common
across NESCent Model-hackathons, but they can be found frequently in other
types of hackathon events as well.

**Leadership team for collaborative well-informed decision making.**
There are many points in the planning phase of a NESCent
Model-hackathon at which decisions have to be made that co-determine
the direction and outcomes of the event, but for which right or wrong
answers do not necessarily exist. To ensure that these decisions are
made in a well-informed and deliberate manner, a leadership team
rather than a single individual is responsible for them. The
leadership team is put in charge early on the process, and is
assembled from people that are invested in the event's outcomes and
that between them represent a wide umbrella of perspectives.

**Structured first day, unstructured rest.** Most of the first day of
hackathons in this model is taken up by structured activities that
start with welcoming everyone and end with participants breaking up
into teams with self-chosen target projects. The rest of the time is
largely unstructured, with teams determining their schedule on their
own. The whole event concludes with show-and-tell of each team,
followed by identifying actions the sponsor can take, or resources the
sponsor could help establish, to aid post-hackathon completion and,
ideally, sustainability of nascent products.

**Daily succinct and brief report-outs ("standups").** To ensure that
related or dependent pieces of work across teams remain
coordinated, each team briefly reports its status, plans for
continuation, and current roadblocks once on each day after the
first. This format is borrowed from the daily "standups" in agile
software development methodologies. Including current roadblocks is
intended to allow tapping into the collective expertise in the room to
overcome these.

**All products are public and open-source, immediately.** This
normally implies that all software tools or resources targeted by work
at the hackathon must be open-source projects. While code produced at
the event may be merged into a larger target codebase only with a
delay, or after further modification, there is no embargo on any of
the code produced at the hackathon.
