<title>
# Using Hackathons to nurture informatics-literate collaborative
communities of practice: Lessons learned from 10 years of NESCent
hackathons
</title>

# Abstract

Hackathons have become popular instruments to stimulate creative
problem solving, and to engender engagement with a sponsor's
objectives. The kinds of problems being targeted, the people whose
engagement is being sought, and the types of objectives sponsors aim
to promote all vary widely. So do the models, processes, and formats
based on which hackathon events are run. Unfortunately, there is scant
data, and even fewer scientific studies, on which way to conceive and
execute a hackathon is most conducive to, or tends to preclude which
kinds of outcomes. Here we report on the experience of planning and
running a cumulative total of 9 hackathons aimed at fostering and
nurturing a domain science community of practice, and its capacity to
collaboratively develop and sustain its informatics resources. We
define the model and process we used throughout these hackathons, and
describe the motivations and goals that underlie them. To enable
future more comprehensive studies, we present the data and evidence we
collected, and discuss which conclusions about the effectiveness of the
events they suggest. We end with recommendations on which data could
be collected at future hackathons to eventually enable an
evidence-based approach to the various decision-making points involved
in planning and running a hackathon.

<main>
# Introduction
(Hilmar)

## Values/Objectives of Hackathons
There are many possible outcomes and impacts of a hackathon (table X): some of these are tangible (*e.g.*, code, publications, etc.) and some are intangible (*e.g.*, increased community diversity or community awareness of technologies or best practices). The procedures for holding a hackathon that we have developed were generated specifically based on the value we give to these outcomes. Decisions on participant pools, for example, may be heavily driven on the relative weight one gives to tangible vs. intangible impacts. Organizers need to make decisions based on maximizing the outcomes they value the most.

<table>
<tr><th>Tangible Outcome</th><th>Measures &amp; Complications</th></tr>
<tr>
 <td>Code</td>
 <td>Draft vs working quality, Sustained development activity, Attention received ("#stars", "#watchers"), Adoption by non-participants (forks, downloads, citations). Lines of code and # of commits are not useful measures.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Publications</td>
 <td># publications, # citations</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Grant Proposals and Funding</td>
 <td># of proposals, $ amount</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Documentation</td>
 <td># of documents, # of words or pages</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Other Products</td>
 <td>Data Sets, Standards, Ontologies, etc.</td>
</tr>
<tr><th>Intangible Outcome</th><th>Measure(s)</th></tr>
<tr>
 <td>Increased Collaboration</td>
 <td># of novel collaborators (software/publications) from participants post-hackathon</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Broadening Communities/Networks</td>
 <td>Increased participation/friends/followers of mailing lists, social networks, etc.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Community Awareness/Training in Technologies, Standards, or Best Practices</td>
 <td># new users of a technology</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Increased Diversity</td>
 <td>Diversity includes demographic concepts (gender, ethnicity, experience) and disciplinary concepts</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Publicity/Brand Awareness</td>
 <td>Conference presentations/posters, Press releases (and where they are picked up), Social media impressions</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Broadening Perspectives</td>
 <td>Idea inspiration for projects/work unrelated to hackathon</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>Connecting Cultures</td>
 <td>Bridging the culture gap between "coders" and "users"</td>
</tr>
</table>

Measuring the impact of these outcomes can be very difficult. "How much code is generated by a hackathon?" Measures such as number of lines of code or number of commits can be meaningless since these counts are very fungible based on the style in which individuals write code. Number of programs or scripts produced is barely better: is the code rough draft or a polished product? How bug-free does it need to be? Does it need to work at all or can it be conceptual? Does what happens to the code after the hackathon matter? Is code that is used widely by the community (download counts? citations? github forks?) count the same as code that is completely ignored? There are no simple answers to these questions and the matter is even worse for intangible outcomes where direct measurement may be more difficult.

One clear lesson learned is that data and meta-data about a hackathon need to be collected more deliberately by the leadership team, both before, during, and after the event. This is discussed in more detail below.

<!--
List of possible outcomes:
* increased diversity (demographic, and otherwise) of participants in  related software projects (developed from "early on, we wanted experts  to build tools, later we were more inclusive and more focused on  diversity")
* community becomes aware of a particular problem and technologies to solve it (example of web services)
* one of goals is community capacity building; informatics and open source literacy
* introduction to other open source and collaboration tools
* bridge gap between coder culture and user culture
* also what technical folks can learn about better software engineering
* also what technical folks can learn about better social skills
* tangible outputs via NEAD - pubs, proposals, software, data sets, data formats, presentations, newsletters
-->
<!--
* tangible outputs not via NEAD
** lines of code committed, commits
** conference sessions organized
** educational or training materials
** live demos
** screencasts
** web sites 
** mailing lists
** web analytics, github analytics
** blog posts - Holly; Arlin
** internet buzz
** report submitted to NESCent 
** co-authoring of pubs, proposals - don't have
** collaborations - don't have
** technologies adopted (e.g., github)
** concepts learned - 
** doors opened - 
** progression of involvement in community activities
** sharing of resources 

Why collect/measure them:
* need impacts that pointy-headed bosses can understand / appreciate
* would like to be able to justify using budget for hackathons vs meetings; do hackathons lead to something worth funding

Generic thoughts/observations:
* do hackathon papers get sufficient citations?
* difficult to quantify impact well; there are research groups working on software communities and software impact
* given limited resources, what outputs to focus on?
* getting sustainable products out of hackathons is very difficult
* hacking medicine hackathons (http://hackingmedicine.mit.edu/):   large events; specifically geared toward products that could become   startups; commercially viable products; number of products is  impressive  but may not be a higher % than what we have
* hypothesis: the less the products are pre-conceived, the better they turn out 

Tensions between achieving particular kinds of output/benefit/impact
* goal   of writing code + goal of building community; makes it a challenge  when  planning (writing / evaluating applications; facilitation)
-->


# NESCent model
The NESCent Model for hackathons distinguishes itself in certain salient characteristics from the many other models being practiced. These characteristics are motivated by two foundational objectives: one, to allow tackling the often difficult problems of making existing tools and resources work together more seamlessly; and two, to foster sustained, cohesive communities of practice.

The distinguishing characteristics designed to accomplish these objectives can be reduced to a combination of the following three.

1. **A participant group that balances diversity with homogenity, and that is about 20-30 people in size.** The idea is a group small and homogeneous enough in size and composition that every participant will still interact with everyone else in at least a meaningful social capacity, yet large enough to allow for diversity in a variety of aspects, including perspectives, skills, career stage, field of study, and demographics.

2. **A well-defined scope that everyone buys into by virtue of participating.** Such a definition gives functional as well as technological targets. It is also balanced between open enough to allow for emergent outcomes, and specific enough to define the event by requiring, and thus signifying buy-in from prospective participants to shared goals and desired outcomes.

3. **A duration of 4.5-5 days.** This has shown to be still short enough to not preclude people from participating who are otherwise well suited for an event. It is also long enough to allow participants to attempt solutions to data and software interoperability issues, which are often challenging yet become tractable with the right set of collaborators in the room. And it is long enough to allow ample    room for participant bonding over common obstacles and shared goals, which is key to fostering and sustaining community growth and cohesion.

We have used this model exclusively for hackathons in academia, for bringing together academic research projects, and to foster communities of practice that consist largely of scientists and research staff. The model is potentially well applicable to non-profit and government settings as well, but in the industry realm in particular the duration will prevent most people from participating.

The following additional characteristics have also emerged as common across NESCent Model-hackathons, but they can be found frequently in other types of hackathon events as well.

**Leadership team for collaborative well-informed decision making.** There are many points in the planning phase of a NESCent Model-hackathon at which decisions have to be made that co-determine the direction and outcomes of the event, but for which right or wrong answers do not necessarily exist. To ensure that these decisions are made in a well-informed and deliberate manner, a leadership team rather than a single individual is responsible for them. The leadership team is put in charge early on the process, and is assembled from people that are invested in the event's outcomes and that between them represent a wide umbrella of perspectives. 

**Structured first day, unstructured rest.** Most of the first day of hackathons in this model is taken up by structured activities that start with welcoming everyone and end with participants breaking up into teams with self-chosen target projects. The rest of the time is largely unstructured, with teams determining their schedule on their own. The whole event concludes with show-and-tell of each team, followed by identifying actions the sponsor can take, or resources the sponsor could help establish, to aid post-hackathon completion and, ideally, sustainability of nascent products. 

**Daily succinct and brief report-outs ("standups").** To ensure that related or dependent pieces of work across teams remain coordinated, each team briefly reports its status, plans for continuation, and current roadblocks once on each day after the first. This format is borrowed from the daily "standups" in agile software development methodologies. Including current roadblocks is intended to allow tapping into the collective expertise in the room to overcome these. 

**All products are public and open-source, immediately.** This normally implies that all software tools or resources targeted by work at the hackathon must be open-source projects. While code produced at the event may be merged into a larger target codebase only with a delay, or after further modification, there is no embargo on any of the code produced at the hackathon.

# Process Model 
The following is a detailed description of the logistical model we have developed for running hackathons. This model has evolved over the 10 years and the description largely reflects the final model. Discussions of where and why the model has changed are used to illustrate the lessons learned.

## Overall Structure
(figure)

## Design Stages [ENRICO]
The design stage activities are designed and implemented by a group of people, referred to as the *instigators*. The instigators represent the core team, which inspires the overall activities and are responsible for the final outcomes. In our experiences, the instigators are often part of a working group or a community that is trying to accomplish some broad goals. As an example, the database interoperability hackathon is a product of the activities of the NESCent EvoInfo working group, with the broad aim to achieve goals of interoperability among data repositories and tools in evolutionary biology. 

### Setting Broad Goals and Resources
Identifying resources is a critical phase of the process, and involves identifying funding entities that are willing to provide the funds necessary to realize an hackathon event. 

* how to tie the broad goals of a working group into the goals of an hackathon?
* how to identify possible funding sources
** Organizations that are dedicate to support working group initiatives (e.g., NESCent)
** Organizations that support the community of interest
** Non-profit or for-profit organizations that have an interest in the broad scope of the activity (e.g., iPlant)
** Other stakeholders (e.g., universities)

### Establishing the Hackathon Initiative
In the context of a working group, the decision of pursuing an hackathon event to advance the broad goals should be driven by a set of values that are achievable through the structure of an hackathon. The hackathon provides the following benefits:
* Facilitate the development of a tight community of individuals that share the common interest of creating solution for a problem that is shared by a broader community (e.g., integration and reuse of data and resources);
* Learn or share new technologies, develop the foundations for broad adoptions of new technologies or methodologies
* Compose and integrate a selected set of expertise that can uniquely lead to the creation of ideas and tools
* Develop a technological or methodological foundation that requires a focused and committed effort and that will provide the basis for the achievement of the broader goals of the working group

### Assembling the Leadership Team
An important step in the process is the formation of a leadership team (LT) that will guide all the following activities. The role of the LT is to refine the goals and scope of the hackathon event, design the recruitment process, and supervise the implementation of the event. 
A lesson we learned is the importance and the value of creating a LT that is diverse and inclusive, and not necessarily composed exclusively of the instigators. The selection of a LT team is informed by principles like
* *Expertise:* the broad topic of the hackathon will inform a set of expertise that are necessary to formulate the appropriate scope of the event; the expertise will also faciliate the identification of potential participants to invite to the event
* *Diversity:* diversity in the LT is critical to provide the connections and the perspectives necessary to facilitate the recruitment of a diverse group of participants
* *Vision:* members of the LT are in charge of establishing the scope of the hackathon; as such, they need to be capable of providing a general vision, that is both realistic/feasible as well as groundbreaking.
* *Management Experience:* the members of the LT will provide the overall supervision and management of the hackathon event; as such, they will need to provide adequate expertise in team management, group formation, and other relevant management skills. 

### Setting Scope and Goals

A critical aspect of the hackathon event is to establish early on the scope and goals of the activities that will take place during the actual event. The choice of the theme of the hackathon should reflect
* the overall objective of the project, along with the commitment to the funding entities
* the desire to meet the needs of a community
The scope and goals should meet the criteria of 
* feasibility: the goals should lead to tangible outcomes within the length of the hackathon event
* interest: the goals should be general enough to enable participants to recognize themselves, feel engaged, and see a value for their participation to the event.

How a hackathon is scoped should be directly led by its specific objective and goals as there most likely will be significant tradeoffs. A well-defined scope can ease the decision making process regarding those tradeoffs as well as manage the expectations of potential participants. A scope should be flexible enough to allow participants to employ creativity and discover group goals thus enabling projects of common interest, yet limited enough that it meets the overall objectives as determined by the Leadership Team and sponsor(s).

==maybe add to discussion==

For example, NESCent's Phylotastic II hackathon had a very open-scope with the greatest talent diversity. However, it produced fewer tangible products than typical which may be due to its loose structure.  In contrast, Phylotastic I was also open-scoped however with far less talent diversity, but had stronger tangible results. On the other hand, a loosely-defined scope can also lead people to work increasingly on their own rather than in groups, which was seen in the VoCamp hackathon.

As a result, there may exist a tension between the goals of producing tangible products and increasing talent diversity. We have found that having two disparate goals of producing large amounts of useful code while also focusing on community building is challenging, particularly during application evaluation and facilitation of the actual hackathon.

It is also important to decide on the technologies used.  The Leadership Team must specify the technological and thematic limits to ensure that conformant projects advance the goals of the sponsors, while giving maximum flexibility to participants to leverage their own unique technology skills.  NESCent hackathons  typically have technology limitations (or technological focus) as part of the scope.  For Comparative Methods in R, the technology limit was to use R, and the thematic limit was the academically defined area of comparative evolutionary methods.  For the Database  Interoperability Hackathon, we encouraged users to apply a specific interoperability "stack" developed by the EvoInfo working group (NeXML  file format, PhyloWS web service schema, and CDAO, the comparative data  analysis ontology) to the problem of building links between data  resources, or linking resources to users. For the TreeForAll hackathon, the technology limitation was to make use of OpenTree's web services API, and there was no restriction on themes.  For Phylotastic I and II the thematic limit was the development of a workflow system to facilitate extraction and use of parts of large trees; we encouraged participants to explore the components of the workflow, the underlying architectural variations to make the workflow feasible, and possible applications of the system.

Our practice is to encourage and enable, but not rigidly enforce, conformity to scope. In practice, projects that do not conform to the scope rarely  make it out of the pitching stage.  The scope is encouraged by the Leadership Team, first by the communicating within participant advertisements, and thereafter by interactions with participants.  The opening talks on Day 1 of the hackathon should reiterate the scope and explain what it signifies.   When a potentially out-of-scope idea arises, rather than asking a negatively framed question ("Isn't that out of scope?"), a more welcoming approach is simply to ask the proposer to flesh out possible ways in which the idea aligns with the thematic and technical scope of  the hackathon ("what are some ways that this project will . . .?").  This type of question should be asked both during pre-event engagement, and during pitching (by organizers present at the hackathon). 


## Pre-Hackathon Activities

###Logistical Aspects

####Facilities
The hackathon requires a single large meeting room, particularly on the first day, where general discussion, introductions, bootcamp activities, and pitches can occur. The room should be large enough not only to seat everyone, but also to allow free movement and clustering during the pitch session. When possible, it is best if the structure of the seating is non-hierarchical; for example, in a smaller group setting, a single large table which only seats a subset of participants, with others arranged around it sets up a social structure which potentially drops participants into two tiers (with one, literally, "at the table"). 

*Anecdote: during the opening session of one hackathon of about 30 participants, the room was arranged with chairs in standard rows. It was observed that, with the exception of a single person who was on the leadership team, every woman at the hackathon had chosen a seat in the back two rows of the room. The LT noticed this and made a point of ensuring that this lack of integration did not continue throughout the meeting (it did not).*

Beyond these full group activities, however, the large room does not have to serve as a primary workspace when the individual projects get going. In fact, smaller separate rooms are often preferred because it allows each individual group to work and discuss without disturbing other groups. Optimally, these rooms should be near enough the primary group room that people can easily check in with other groups, catch up for meals and breaks, group updates, etc.

Generally, computer equipment is not expected to be provided and participants will be working on their own laptops. Because so much of the hackathon activities involve computers, it should be clear and understood that readily available WiFi access and numerous electrical outlets are absolutely necessary.

An important part of the model rotate around the idea of open-spaces, where individuals develop pitches for potential projects and recruit team members to develop such projects. The creation of open spaces has an impact on facilities - requiring the availability of  a wide area, provided with either whiteboards or poster boards, where people can sketch ideas and instantiate groups. 

####Communication Technology
The nature of a hackathon makes heavy use of a variety of communication technologies likely. Experience indicates that the organizers should choose preferred technologies in advance and try to get users to stick with this set. Consistency among participants becomes very important, both for general communication and for archiving. In one hackathon involving remote participants, a particular group was using one communication technology before lunch and then switched, without announcement, to another technology after lunch. Remote participants had no way of knowing this and were left out of discussion until this was discovered. In general, we encourage technologies which are free, open, and multi-platform, although the needs of a particular project may preclude some of these factors. Major categories of communicaiton technology to consider include:

**Version Control:** There are many types of version control available. Among the most popular, and the one we have used in recent years, is Git and Github. SVN is also very popular. An early hackathon used Google Code, but they recently announced this service is being shut down.

**Document Editing:** Shared document editing capabilities is essential, whether for note taking, concept planning, documentation, etc. There are many such technologies, including wikis, Google Docs, Mozilla's Etherpad, Github documents, etc. The most important thing is that everyone use the same technologies, otherwise documents get scattered across too many systems in too many different formats.

**Communication:** There are many systems for direct communication, including Skype, Google Hangouts, IRC, etc. Even telephones. These will be primarily used pre- and post-hackathon, but can be used during, either to communicate with remote participants or sometimes when teams are scattered throughout different rooms. Again, the most important thing is to decide in advance which protocols will be used and stick with them, otherwise some members may not know where or how to tune into important conversations.

#### Travel
The presence of an organization (e.g., NESCent) that can handle the logistical aspects of the hackathon is strongly encouraged. Travel arrangements should be consistent with the duration of the hackathon, ensuring that participants are at the location on time for the beginning of Day 1 of the event (which is critical to the overall event). The travel arrangements should also emphasize that the participation to the complete event is strongly encouraged (as often the projects start shaping only after the first 2 days of the event). Locating all participants in the same residential venue (e.g., the same hotel) will also facilitate interactions outside of the daily hackathon activities and develop a social infrastructure to the hackathon.

###Advertising for Participants
Two basic models: invitation and open call (or a mix of both). The pros of the invitation model is that you ensure that you have the right expertise, you can better control diversity by careful invitation. The cons are that you necessarily restrict participation to those you know to invite, which may be a biased pool. The pros of the open call are that you potentially hit a wider audience, people who you may not have known of or considered; also shows a direct interest in engaging the community. The cons are that you may end up missing necessary expertise. You may find a lack of diversity in applicants. You may not get enough applicants.

Generally, we have used a mixed model, where we target invitations to people who have particular expertise and as a means of increasing diversity, but always including an open application process to try go find broader members of the community who we may have missed. One needs to be careful in this model because if you target too many people with direct invitations, there may not be enough space for those responding to the open call. Generally, if you directly invite someone it’s hard to later not accept them.

Direct invitation is a powerful means of helping to improve diversity. Beyond directly targeting “minorities” (inc. women) for participation, you can target them as mentors who may have students, postdocs, or colleagues that they can suggest as participants. 

Our advertising has been predominantly through popular mailing lists in the appropriate academic discipline, as well as spreading word through emails to colleagues. Generally the first call for applications would go out about 3 weeks before the deadline, with a second call/reminder at 1 week. Direct invitations would go out at the time of the first call, but additional ones can be sent later as other names/suggestions come in.

*Figure/Appendix X: example of an hackathon advertisement*

###The Application Process
We have used a fairly simple application form (through Google Docs) for screening participants (Figure/Appendix X). Beyond obvious fields such as name and contact info, we were interested in the following major fields: (1) availability: can the person attend the entire event; (2) a general checklist of skills/expertise that were applicable to the hackathon theme; (3) personal goal for attending the hackathon: why do they want to attend and what do they want to get from it; (4) demographics. (Lesson learned: we did not ask for demographic info in earlier applications, but found that diversity suffered when we did not have information to help balance decisions); (5) where they are coming from (for budgeting purposes) and whether they have support to attend without our funding.

At one point we asked for proof of expertise, but it was a bit awkward and did not work very well. 

###Criteria for Choosing Participants
Choosing participants for a hackathon is more complicated than simply choosing expert programmers. A number of criteria need to be considered in trying to optimize productivity. These include (1) the ability to work with others. Some people may be great at working alone, but unable to work in a group setting, which makes them a poor choice for such a group project. (2) Balancing coders and users. Having people who will be using the product working directly with the people who are writing them can help each side better understand how the two halves go together: coders can learn about the way users will want to use a product and the ways in which they’ll be capable of using it (interface), while users will learn more about what is feasible for a product. (3) Diversity: if one of the main goals of a hackathon is to increase the community engagement in a product, system, or concept, it is important to recruit from the broader representative community. This is not always easy. In a general call for applications, one often finds that those who view themselves on the fringes of the “hacker” community will not apply or feel that they cannot contribute, so effort needs to be made to directly encourage and/or invite them. 

Want to invite people who will be motivated, who will gain long-term advantage of the experience. 

Generally, it is often good to mix participants of different career stages because it increases networking and community much more so than a hackathon of all experienced people. You want to mix newcomers with those who’ve been around, to increase community size. One draw of a hackathon to younger participants may be the opportunity to interact with established researchers and programmers. When one is concerned about tangible products as part of the outcome (defined earlier), a balance of career stages may be of particular importance. Younger participants whose future career and job success may be more dependent on tangible outputs will be more motivated to continue with and finish projects after the hackathon has ended; senior participants for whom the output is more of a bonus than a necessity are more likely to fail to find them time in their busy schedules and let projects go fallow (note: there is evidence of this for working groups...should apply to hackathons as well). Our experience is predominantly with hackathons in academic settings, but our hackathons have been a mix of faculty, postdocs, students, and research staff. Research staff generally have greater limitations on post-hackathon time commitments and thus will be less likely to be able to commit after the hackathon is over; related to the earlier point, they are also less likely to generate a career benefit from a product.

Diversity includes gender, ethnicity, experience, and research discipline.

Generally, we have found that the entire leadership team does not have to participate in individual hackathons. A minimum number of members of the LT is critical to ensure that the discussion and activities of the hackathon are consistent with the original scope and that teams are formed and operate in a consistent and positive manner. It is our experience that participating LT members are actively contributing to individual teams, and occasionally they have provided pitches for projects. 

###Process for Choosing Participants
Applications were divided among leadership team members in a staggered fashion such that each applicant was reviewed by three different people. Applications were scored on a 3 point scale (3 = top, 2 = solid, 1 = poor; half point intervals sometimes used), based on the criteria described above, with a textual explanation for the ranking. Applicants were then ranked from high to low, and a conference call used to choose participants. The ranking was used as a general guide, but not as an absolute decision making criterion, in order to allow the leadership team to best balance the needs of expertise, experience, and diversity. Alternates were identified in case slots opened up after invitations were extended. 

###Pre-hackathon Engagement

We have tried to do this using mailing lists, github discussions (ex OpenTree), wiki pages, etc. There are multiple objectives associated to the pre-hackathon engagement:
* Identify technologies and methodologies that will be critical for the hackathon event and whose knowledge might not be shared by all participants - which will lead to the creation of bootcamp events for the first day of the hackathon
* Encourage participants to think about possible projects that can be developed during the hackathon events, and possibly develop an initial set of pitches for such projects. 
Generally, there has not been much success in getting people to engage prior to the hackathon. (The following is a guess). Those who do engage prior to the hackathon are likely to engage during so; little can be predicted about the during-hackathon-engagement of those who do not engage prior to the hackathon, however.

Pre-event analysis and participant interviews can organically lead to the structuring and facilitation style of the hackathon.

##During the Hackathon

### what we aimed to do:

### what we wanted to avoid:

* people working on own rather than in groups

### what worked/advice:

- Make people feel welcome; encourage people

- "No plan survives contact with the enemy" (substitute "reality" for "the enemy"?): be flexible, don't overplan

- if you can get people in room working on something that they care about, get best outcomes

- Communication is much more key than people are likely realize

- Facilitation is very important, particularly social facilitation

- work with any on-site event coordinator regarding access, signage, powerstrips/outlets etc

### decisions to make

- whether or not to allow critique at the pitching stage

###Schedule and Structure
####Day 1
*Active facilitation, especially during the first day, is critical to "keep true" to the scope and keep the event as a whole on-topic.*

The first day of the hackathon is the most unique in structure, because it serves to create the process that will carry through the remaining days. The first activity in the morning is usually a brief introduction by the organizers, typically aimed at reinforcing the scope of the hackathon.
The initial opening is followed by very brief introductions from all the participants (who you are, why you’re there). 

The next major activity is an open brain-storming session aimed at exploring the overall scope of the hackathon, clarify any aspect that might be unclear and refine the scope. This part of the event is typically not focused on technical discussions, unless these are necessary for the refinement and clarification of the scope.

This was generally followed by a series of technical presentations (“boot camps”), where key technologies or concepts important to the overall planned scope of the project, are introduced. The bootcamps are often identified as part of the pre-engagement activities (e.g., through polls of participants) or are the result of the brain-storming sessions (e.g., they will select which bootcamps will be offered out of an initial set developed before the event). These presentations may be from the leadership team, or may be from participants with particular expertise (arranged in advance). (Note: the timing of these presentations can vary quite a bit; sometimes they are before pitches, sometimes afterwards, sometimes they are optional sessions run simultaneously with work projects on other days. Which scenario works best depends a lot on the nature of the presentations and who will most benefit from them).

Following the open brainstorming and the bootcamps (and usually with a break or meal in between), is an opportunity for individuals to make specific pitches about the project(s) they would like to work on. Each individual who wants to make a pitch is given a minute or two to explain their idea. Generally, each pitch is assigned a space in the meeting room where brief discussion and assembly will occur. Each pitch typically articulates
* The expected goals and deliverables
* A possible approach to reach the goals
* The pre-identified key challenges that will need to be addressed
* The desired expertise and the possible partnerships with other projects; this last aspect should also somehow motivate how the project fits within the overall scope of the hackathon.

After all pitches are made, the group as a whole are given an opportunity to wander around, discuss pitches more succinctly and specifically, and to generally self-assemble into potential teams. When the self-organization is complete, a re-evaluation of the pitches is made: the focus of some may have shifted as participants joined project ideas, other pitches may have insufficient support to continue, etc. A group evaluation, facilitated by the leadership team, may be important at this stage in order to prevent individual projects from drifting too far off scope, to prevent projects whose feasibility is unrealistic for the time allowed, and to identify potential holes or gaps in the overall structure that might need to be filled. 

At this stage, with primary projects identified and teams self-assembled, the remainder of the day is left for teams to begin planning how they will attack their individual projects.

####Days 2+
Most of the rest of the days of the hackathon are spent with teams working on their individual projects, with occasional time taken to reassemble as a group to update progress. These stand-ups are generally meant to be short and, we have found, generally only need to be performed about twice per day (to avoid wasting too much time on updates) - once before breaking for lunch and once at the end of the day.

####Last Day
At the end of the hackathon, a general assembly to wrap things up, discuss overall progress, future plans, etc. takes place. Typical components of this final event include
* Final reports (presentations) from the different teams
* Identification of needed followups from each project
* Identification of expected tangible products that can be achieved in a short time after the hackathon (e.g., publications, presentations at conferences, commitments to codebases)
Hackathons have also included more general discussions about long-term followups (e.g., identification of potential funding sources that would enable scaling up some of the development efforts). It is recommended that participants assume responsibility for the completion of components of the various projects (e.g., see http://www.evoio.org/wiki/Phylotastic1#Projected_tangible_outcomes).


##Post Hackathon Activities

At the end of the hackathon, there are a number of activities that are either required or desirable. The most obvious *required* activities include:
* **Logistical Activites:** wrapping up the event requires providing reimbursements to the participants for the expenses incurred during the event. This is typically handled through the sponsoring organization.
* **Reports:** Sponsoring organizations will typically require the development of a final report that summarizes the activities and accomplishments achieved during the hackathon. The development of such report is typically main responsibility of the instigators of the event (even though other members of the LT may actively participate). 

It is typically uncommon that tangible outcomes are completed within the 5-day period of the hackathon. In order to concretize and properly disseminate tangible deliverables, it is typically necessary to coordinate some follow-up activities that will take place after the end of the hackathon. This might include activities aimed at
* Developing manuscripts and/or presentations that summarize the activities and deliverables
* Completing code that can be made publicly available and/or committed to a public repository
* Finalizing a schema or methodology and documenting it for others to use
* Completing the development of a dataset that can be made publicly available.

A number of approaches have been explored to sustain the follow-up activities focused on tangible deliverables:
* Mailing lists established during the pre-engagement phases are maintained alive and used to continue communication, solicit engagement and advertise results
* Several hackathon relied on the use of wikis to track ideas, activities, deliverables; follow-up activities have often centered around continuing populating the wiki pages with results and accomplishments
* In at least one hackathon, a follow-up distributed hackathon was organized, where participants committed one entire day to work on the project remotely (at their home institutions), with regular scheduled interactions (e.g., through Google Hangouts). The goal was to encourage continued development of the artifacts started during the hackathon.
* It has been common practice for subsets of participants (typically led by the project leaders) to assemble the achievements of the hackathon project in a manuscript (e.g., the Phylotastic manuscript, which collected as authors the majority of the participants to the Phylotastic I hackathon) or in presentations/sessions at relevant conferences (e.g., the presentations about different aspects of the Phylotastic II hackathon at iEvoBio 2013).
* Ideas for broader developments often arise as the result of the activities of the hackathon, leading to the development of grant proposals to support them (e.g., to hire graduate students or professional programmers to scale-up implementations and applications).



# Results and Discussion

## Growing community
* What aspects/qualities of participants leads to greater sustained effort?
* Recruiting people for whom the product matters lends to better success, as well as people who have some existing connection to the project.
* Found that electing all participants by invitation is ineffective (ex. Japan hackathons needed more expectation management)

### Make people feel welcome; encourage people

Being welcoming during the event
* provide bootcamps to address issues that might not be of knowledge to all participants
* instruct pitchers to keep an open circle (don't turn back on others, don't get deep in a 1:1)
* organize whole-group social event and create strong expectation of participation

Being welcoming during recruiting
*  specifically name and identify groups and roles other than programmer;  never refer to participants as though they are chiefly "programmers" if  you want to welcome people who are not chiefly programmers
* dial back on intimidating technical language in the advertisement
* invite people to apply by personal contact and encouragement

Being welcoming during the pre-event engagement period: 
* contact newbies individually by email with a welcome message (from an LT member)
* invite each person to introduce themselves on group email list 
* provide positive and encouraging feedback on ideas

Actions taken during three different stages are critical to creating a  welcoming atmosphere. First, when crafting recruitment materials and  deciding where to target advertisements, remember that hackathons are not just for gurus. Dial back on the technical language (in the advertisement materials), and make the big picture clear. Specify non-programmer roles (e.g., "subject-matter expert", "use-case consultant"), and avoid implicitly equating participants with programmers (e.g., don't refer to  participants as "programmers" or "coders").
Second, during pre-event  engagement, add everyone to an event- or project-specific email list and  ask them to introduce themselves to the list. Encourage all participants to develop possible ideas for the hackathon event and provide encouraging feedback on ideas discussed on the list. Send a personal, encouraging email to any newbies who seem to need it.
Third and most importantly, be welcoming during the event, particularly on day 1. Use  bootcamps and technical talks to get everyone up to speed on core technologies for the event. Prior to pitching, instruct participants to  form an open circle around pitches, not a queue or a block—in particular, if the pitcher and a few others are having a highly technical discussion with their backs to everyone else, this is very unwelcoming, and the facilitators should step in and remind them to **keep the circle open.** Participants leading a pitch and subsequent team should encourage participation of all the team members (asking questions, positively encouraging inputs). A critical component is ensuring the formation of positive interactions  among participants, *e.g.*, through a whole-group social event to cap off the first day (solicit ideas from participants). 

## Diversifying community
* Talent diversity can be a disadvantage if you don't manage expectations.
** Ex: Phylotastic II focused too much on diversity. Some participants didn't end up fitting into a group, which didn't advance goals.
* Ensure participant talent diversity is appropriate for hackathon goals.
* Talent diversity can be an advantage.
** Ex: Phyloinformatics/R hackathons had a similar talent diversity profile to Phylotastic II, but didn't experience the same issues [why do we think this is?]

## Technology awareness and knowledge exchange

## Achieving tangible working products

* Building sustainable products out of hackathons is very difficult
** Ex. Hacking medicine hackathons (http://hackingmedicine.mit.edu/): large events; specifically geared toward products that could become startups; commercially viable products; number of products is impressive but may not be a higher % than what we have
* The less products are pre-conceived, the better they have tended to turn out
** Ex: R hackathon - very little source code available before the event, all code open-source after event 
* Managing expectations with respect to deliverables is important 

* **Career stage of participants:** An observation which comes from working groups at some of the national synthesis centers (NCEAS, NESCent, NIMBios) is that one driver of success of many working groups is having a good mix of junior and senior participants. While senior participants are essential for their experience and knowledge of problems and systems, their schedules are often busier post event and following up on a particular outcome for the event has less impact on their career. In contrast, a junior participant (graduate student, postdoc, untenured professor) may be much more driven to follow up and drive production after an event because the tangible product may have a large impact on progression to their next career stage. Hackathons are likely to follow this same pattern, with an even greater complication: research staff. Many of the hackathons we have conducted have included large numbers of research staff, often chosen for their programming/domain expertise. While invaluable during the hackathon, these participants may be the least likely to see a direct career benefit from continued production of a tangible product after the hackathon (the personal benefits to them may follow the intangible benefits) and, more importantly, they often lack the job flexibility in time and effort that someone in a more traditional academic position can devote to following up on details.

Thus to achieve tangible working products, one should consider whether (1) deliverables can be achieved in the time slotted for the hackathon, or (2) whether choosing participants who may lack certain skills or experience may serve the overall goal better by their likelihood of being able to dedicate extra time after the even to follow-up and complete the project.

Another critical aspect in the achievement of tangible results and sustainable continuation of the projects is the ability to coalesce a community around the 

Hypotheses/questions about ways of getting more post-event activity/sustainability:

- what aspect of people involved in event lead to sustained effort?


-  hypothesis:  the community "buys" into the activities of the hackathon  and are willing to embrace and continue (e.g., they become part of a  used codebase)
-  hypothesis:  projects with better code may be more likely to continue  and those  might come from people with software engineering experience

generic thoughts/observations:

- having time-post hackathon is only one aspect of sustainability

- getting sustainable products out of hackathons is very difficult

- Setting expectations about what will happen afterwards is important

## Allowing hard targets to be tackled

## Using face-to-face time productively

## and others...

## Data we wish we had collected

* Ask participants who they know beforehand (and who they've collaborated with beforehand), then who they know afterward = measurement of connection
* Publications
* Citations
* New collaborations
* Social media participation
* Query participants on familiarity with key technologies of interest prior to hackathon (particularly those which form the core of the project or which are introduced in bootcamps). Quern afterwards to see how many use these technologies after the event has completed.
* Keep track of who does what when. Which individuals make the pitches? Which pitches are chosen to move forward? 

# Conclusions
Hackathons rule!

# Resources

Ten Simple Rules to Achieve Conference Speaker Gender Balance http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003903

Work Groups, Structural Diversity, and Knowledge Sharing in a Global  Organization, Jonathon N. Cummings, Management Science, Vol. 50, No. 3  (Mar., 2004), pp. 352-364

</main>
