Title: Using Hackathons to nurture informatics-literate collaborative
communities of practice: Lessons learned from 10 years of NESCent
hackathons

# Abstract

Hackathons have become popular instruments to stimulate creative
problem solving, and to engender engagement with a sponsor's
objectives. The kinds of problems being targeted, the people whose
engagement is being sought, and the types of objectives sponsors aim
to promote all vary widely. So do the models, processes, and formats
based on which hackathon events are run. Unfortunately, there is scant
data, and even fewer scientific studies, on which way to conceive and
execute a hackathon is most conducive to, or tends to preclude which
kinds of outcomes. Here we report on the experience of planning and
running a cumulative total of 9 hackathons aimed at fostering and
nurturing a domain science community of practice, and its capacity to
collaboratively develop and sustain its informatics resources. We
define the model and process we used throughout these hackathons, and
describe the motivations and goals that underlie them. To enable
future more comprehensive studies, we present the data and evidence we
collected, and discuss which conclusions about the effectiveness of the
events they suggest. We end with recommendations on which data could
be collected at future hackathons to eventually enable an
evidence-based approach to the various decision-making points involved
in planning and running a hackathon.
