

## Day 4 ideas for followup discussion: 
* data set plan
* manuscript plan
* keeping evoio content alive
* EvoIO network and related ideas
* hackathon evangelism? 
* any important questions that remain
* importance of saving event information
* how can we measure community or network impact? 



## Post-lunch discussion day 4:

### Manuscript - we all want to go for:

* an initial unornamented dataset to go e.g. in Dryad, to be part of the "main paper"
* Dataset (archivable, to go with the data) will be led by Karen
    * also Arlin, Enrico, Aidan (Mike, Shann as feasible)


### Data

#### DATA
* events
* people - we still need to add:
    * github handles
    * fixes/data cleaning
* projects - we still need to add:
    * more entries i.e. we need to add descriptions, github etc. handles for some rows
    * split out repos into products
    * check the data
* products - need to:
    * decide how to complete we want to make this
    * we'll be systematic about:
        * team reports
        * repos

Demographic info will only be published in summary form.

#### METADATA
* descriptions of terms...

#### SCRIPTS

#### Aspirational data
* github activity
* remote participants (we don't yet record this)

#### Planning to finish off the data stuff

We want to have a teleconference about this to plan what to do, who, by when, etc.

We can repeat teleconferences if we need, until we're finished: Karen will set up the first teleconference

Student assistance via NESCent is time-limited - then the earlier we make the case for that the better.

* Arlin commits 12 hours to finish stuff, and for a teleconfernece
* Enrico is fine
* Shann is there to support 
* Aidan too

Authorship on the Dryad data-package can be different/different order from that on the paper. We will order authors by effort as judged in terms of hours.

We'll try and decide within the next month if we want to do an extra data paper, particularly as this would impact on decisions about where to send the "main" paper.

### Manuscript

to do:
* Karen, Arlin, Aidan read it soon! WE HAVE TO DO THIS ASAP - we want to answer the questions:
    * what do I see missing?
    * is there anything in there outright wrong?
    * do people who've been working with data, can you see data we can quikly/easily plug in
    * this "READ THROUGH" will be done within 2 weeks
* transfer all etherpad documents - PLEASE DON'T MAKE ANY CHANGES TO ETHERPAD ONCE WE LEAVE HERE TODAY, INSTRUCTION ABOUT THIS WILL BE DELIVERED BY MANUDCRIPT LEAD - and make all the changes to github
* multi-author model
    * begin doing it wikipedia style, then move to lead author (sending comments to them, they integrate them)
        * We'll handle comments by writing them into the GoogleDoc using the <!-- INITIALS --> for short comments ('atomic'), while "issues" should be done in an issue trackdoing 
        * people check that there's nothing important missing
        * teleconference will be used to decide when to swtich from wikipedia to lead-author style
* Mike is (thank you Mike... or is it Brian?) will manage the process
    * No more edits to the etherpad once we leave the room!
* All 7 of us commit to being involved in this until the next milestone i.e. for the next 2 weeks, then we'll re-assess - Mike will assign us to stuff after that e.g. organising teleconferences
* A weak majority preference for going with group authorship, but we will revisit this and aim to build consensus on it later

The data group will decide at teleconference what to do about asking for NESCent student support

Venue suggestions - we'll aim to decide about this in the first teleconernece:
* Journal of Open Research Software http://openresearchsoftware.metajnl.com/ (100 UK Pounds) we reckon they'll agree to accept something like this quickly, and 
* PLoS Biology community section
* PLoS Comptutationl Biology eduction section

Arlin and NESCent can cover publication costs

